Individuals and variables
The simplest kind of information we’ll work with in this course is a set of
individuals with one or more properties, called variables. The individuals
are the items in the data set and can be cases, things, people, etc.
In this table for “heights of people in the car,” the individuals are the
people, and their heights are a variable because height is a property of
each individual.
Together, individuals and variables are called data. When we organize
data into a table like this one, we call it a data table. Here’s an example of
a data table about ice cream:
The individuals are the flavors: Vanilla, Chocolate, Cookies & Cream, etc.,
and the variables are their properties: Scoops sold, Contains chocolate,
and Smooth or chunky.
Variables can be categorical or quantitative. In the table for “heights of
people in the car,” there’s one quantitative variable: the height. In the table
for “ice cream shop data for July,” there’s one quantitative variable
(scoops), and two categorical variables (contains chocolate and smooth or
chunky).
• Categorical variables are non-numerical variables. Categorical
variables are also called “qualitative” variables. Their values aren’t
represented with numbers. Whether or not the ice cream contains
chocolate, and whether the ice cream is smooth or chunky are
categorical variables. This is because the values there are words,
not numbers.
• Quantitative variables are numerical variables. Their values are
numbers. The height of the people in the car and the number of
2
scoops of ice cream sold are quantitative variables, because the
values there are numbers.
We can divide quantitative variables into discrete variables and
continuous variables.
• Discrete variables are those that we can obtain by counting.
Therefore, they can take on only certain numerical values. For
example, the number of scoops of ice cream sold is a discrete
quantitative variable, because we can’t really sell 8.3 or 5.23 scoops
of ice cream.
• On the other hand, continuous variables may include data as
decimals, fractions, or irrational numbers. For example, the height
of the people in the car is a continuous variable
